---
layout: post
title:  "PLAYING LITERATURE"
date:   2018-11-30
excerpt: "I picked up every highlighter in <i>Gone Home</i>"
image: "/images/starship.jpeg"
---

In *Gone Home*, a point-and-click exploration game by the Fullbright Company, the player navigates through an intricate mansion, picking up clues as to where their family has disappeared. The game is driven by narrative plot, rather than by any mechanism of fighting enemies or playing minigames. Another interesting aspect of *Gone Home* is that, at first glance, it has all the trappings of a horror game. You are alone in a creepy (possibly haunted) house, the lights flicker and thunder occasionally rips through your headphones. As you move throughout the game, however, you begin to realize that no one is going to jump out, there are no ghosts, and your family is not dead. Instead, we learn that our sister has fallen in love, and has run away with her girlfriend. There is almost an imperceptible transition between our belief that there will be some grotesque enemy awaiting us at the end, to our understanding that the only enemy might instead be whatever power that has forced the two teenagers apart. 

This kind of narrative video game is not a new phenomenon, as evidenced by one of my favorite video games/works of literature/pieces of art of all time, Douglas Adams’ *Starship Titanic*. Released in 1998, created by the man who brought us *The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy* and featuring voice acting by Terry Jones and John Cleese of *Monty Python* fame, this game is a masterpiece. You are sitting in your home one night, when suddenly a spaceship crashes into your living room. A robot emerges from the ship, and informs you that their ship and all of its robot-crew has been sabotaged, and you are the only one who can help. You board the spaceship, and the adventure begins. You must interact with the robots and the spaceship to solve the puzzle of what has caused the ship to go wrong. The only mechanism of the game is point-and-click, scenes in front of you blurring as you click through to navigate the ship. There is also a text parser that allows you to type anything you want to the robots (and they respond with hilarious, seemingly endless pre-recorded dialogue). And while *Gone Home* co-opts and subverts tropes and elements of the horror genre, *Starship Titanic* assumes the features of a serious, space-epic/hero’s journey, while injecting it at every turn with absurd comedy. As we board the Starship Titanic, we expect to face a spooky, sci-fi labyrinth we have to work through to win. Instead, we have to work our way through the art-deco cruise liner, rising from 3rd class to continental by winning upgrade codes, even though we are the only passenger on the ship. We expect to encounter some evil, alien monster who has vandalized the ship, but instead we find that the creators of the ship tried to destroy it for the insurance money. 

Because of the dual nature of games like *Gone Home* and *Starship Titanic*, neither traditional video games nor traditional forms of literature, there is some disagreement as to whether interactive-narrative games should be analyzed through the same framework as one would analyze a novel, the same framework as one would analyze a game, or whether it requires a totally new paradigm that acknowledges its intersecting qualities. Interestingly, there was a companion novel tie-in to the *Starship Titanic* game. But, when I read it, I found myself missing the kind of subversive feel of the game. Because the player has an understanding of what an adventure video game, or in the case of *Gone Home*, a horror game, should feel like, the ability to subvert these tropes are unique to the video game medium. Sure, a novel could subvert the specific tropes of space-epic literature (see: *Hitchhiker’s Guide*), but it’s a totally different experience than actually controlling the narrative, and in this case the subversion, of the video game. This kind of video game, therefore, necesitate a separate kind of framework of analysis, that embraces the idiosyncrasies and intersectionalities of its narrative and gameplay. 
