---
layout: post
title:  "THE DIGITIZATION OF EMOTIONAL LABOR"
date:   2018-10-26
excerpt: "Are reaction GIFs ruining our humanity?"
image: "/images/emotional.jpg"
---

When communication went digital, it went textual. But now, GIFs bring back the visual elements of communication that add an extra layer of meaning, humor, drama, and understanding to digital conversation that was not possible before. The use of GIFs in digital communication is a pervasive phenomenon, facilitated by search engines and apps that allow you to select the perfect reaction to a given situation. GIFs can be used, according to Kate M. Miltner and Tim Highfield, as “means of performing identity, humor, expertise, and community,” and as “stand-ins that ‘depict lived experience through affective ‘reactions’ to quotidian situations.’” But while GIFs are used as proxy reactions and digital avatars for our non-digital selves, they are, in fact, *not* us. And yet, we send them off, a suitable replacement, while we sit behind our screens, moving on to the next task that demands our attention. But how does using GIFs in such a way distance us from experiencing real emotion, and importantly, performing the emotional labor that is so important in our maintenance of quality relationships?  
Emotional labor is the unpaid, unacknowledged work of supporting, validating, and emotionally satisfying another person. It manifests in a number a ways, in a number of settings, through a number of means. It’s engaging your friend about her day, commiserating with your brother through his breakup, encouraging a coworker to go for that promotion. It’s even laden in the simple task of a keeping a smile on your face, despite what you actually may be feeling. This labor, which often goes unnoticed, is unconsciously demanded in our relationships, and the burden of this work falls disproportionately on women. Psychologist Christine Hutchison, in her piece *Why Women are Tired: the Unpaid Price of Emotional Labor,* writes about this phenomenon in heterosexual relationships: “Often, the woman is aware of her male partner’s needs and feelings at the expense of her own, whereas the male partner struggles to identify and understand both his own and his partner’s emotions.” It’s a case of *once you see it, you can’t unsee it,* and it’s a product of patriarchy, and toxic masculinity, and traditional gender roles, and all that awful stuff. But how is uneven distribution of emotional labor being exacerbated by digital technologies? Do GIFs allow for us to completely escape this labor? Perhaps this liberation could be a positive change, given that it is equally utilized by both parties of the relationship. This kind of digitization of emotional labor recalls the rapid and inescapable automation of industrial work and unskilled labor. So many of our jobs are now performed by robots, and we don’t bat an eye. This has uncomfortable implications on the future of our relationships, a future where emotional labor is distilled into the sending of GIFs, or *literal* proxy-selves, and maybe where emotional labor becomes entirely redundant. What will we gain when we are no longer required to do this work? Time, possibly. Energy to devote to other endeavors, and to ourselves. But what will we lose? What will we become? 


https://www.huffingtonpost.com/psyched-in-san-francisco/why-women-are-tired-the-p_b_9619732.html
