---
layout: post
title:  "PARTY LIKE IT'S 1992"
date:   2018-9-28
excerpt: "I went one day without Googling anything, and you can too!"
image: "/images/xfilesmist.png"
---

When I was preparing for my No-Digital Day experiment, I saw it as a welcome opportunity to reflect on the role of technology in my life. I did not expect it to be too hard, as I like to think I am less addicted to technology than most. But what I did not realize was just how much I use technology outside of just social media and communicating with friends. These realizations began the very moment I woke up in my self-constructed alternate reality of 1992.  

I am a very sound sleeper, so usually, I set several alarms on my phone, which are turned to the highest volume. But this morning, I had borrowed my roommate's alarm clock, which usually sits on her desk while she does her homework. The night before this experiment, I very gingerly set just one alarm on my roommate’s clock, unsure about if the volume would be loud enough or if I had set the alarm for AM or PM or if I would ever wake up at all (a real concern). But luckily, with all of these anxious thoughts swimming around in my unconscious head, I was in a very shallow sleep state when my alarm started its artless beeping at nine in the morning. After performing a very satisfying, 90s-teen-movie-esque thumping of the snooze button, I laid in bed for a moment to get my bearings. I would not go for my phone, as I usually would first thing in the morning. Instead, I looked up at my ugly dorm room ceiling and wondered how I would fill the time that day. 

My mantra quickly became, *What would Dana Scully do?* I realized as my eyes fell to my poster emblazoned with the two stars of *the X Files* that Mulder and Scully had to live like this every day of their lives, all while unlocking government conspiracies and discovering the truth about extraterrestrials. All I had to do was my homework. Filled with sudden determination, I climbed out of my lofted bed and began to get ready for my day. The first wrinkle: weather. Every morning, I check the weather on my phone, which helps me decide on what I should wear that day. Keeping my resolve, I glanced out the window and saw it was raining. Layers would be my friend today, as I couldn’t tell how hot or cold it really was. I topped it off with my rain jacket, and was almost on my way. The second wrinkle: communication. Usually, my friends and I meet at a coffee shop to do work, but as I was leaving I realized I had no idea where they were. I had turned off my text notifications, so for all I knew they were all already slurping lattes without me. I decided to call one of them, something I rarely do. As my friend answered the phone, he seemed almost worried to be hearing my voice, as if calling him indicated there was an emergency, something wrong. I found this funny, and it made me wonder when I stopped calling people. I used to call my friends all the time when I was younger. I’d get off the bus and immediately go for the landline in the kitchen, manually dialing my friends numbers, which I had memorized. I wondered what that said about me now, that there would have to be something wrong for me to call a friend. I tucked that thought away for later. 

I stepped outside my apartment into the rain, and I instantly felt like there was something missing. I felt naked without my headphones in, which is ridiculous considering how many layers I was wearing. Usually when I’m walking around or on the T, I’ll listen to the news from NPR or *the Daily* podcast from *the New York Times*. But today as I walked down the street, I instead heard snippets of conversations and the violent splashing of tires on wet concrete. I was starting to feel a little unmoored from the world, so I decided to duck into a corner store and buy an actual newspaper. The news for me is usually free, so when I forked over three dollars to buy *the Times* I was a little taken aback. I thought about people who didn’t have access to the kind of digital media I was used to. It’s definitely a privilege to be able to surf into multiple different news outlets for free on the Internet when the alternative would be to buy a few newspapers for three dollars each. I paid in cash and tucked the paper into my backpack for later.   

I arrived at the coffee shop, my printed-out syllabi and homework readings in tow, but no laptop. My bag felt delightfully light. Once I purchased my coffee and settled in next to my friends, I started my usual homework routine, setting my belongings on the table in front of me. One thing was missing -- my phone. I rarely ever do my work without listening to music, usually just movie soundtracks to occupy my brain without distracting me. But today, I had to settle for the rock music of the coffee shop, and hope that no one around me would be speaking too loudly, having no ability to tune them out. 

As I began to read my textbook, I quickly ran into a problem. I found myself stopping every few sentences, wanting desperately to Google certain words or concepts, something I usually do to aid in my understanding of the readings. I made a tick mark in my notebook every time this happened, and over the course of an hour and a half I found myself wanting to reach for my phone eleven times. To make things worse, I was so distracted by the music in the coffee shop that I couldn’t finish my work. I felt so disappointed in myself, thinking homework would be the easiest task of the day, wrongly believing that having no technology would make me less distracted, not more. I was disgruntled by my lack of focus, and figured I might be better off in the silence of my room. Defeated, I headed back home. 

Still frustrated from my experience out in the world, I decided to take a break from my homework to read my newspaper. The tactility of the dry, thin paper, even the smell of the ink and the rustle of the pages reminded me of Saturday mornings at my house, doing the crossword puzzle, my Mom poring over the Arts section and my Dad angrily reading Op-Eds. I felt instantly calm, something I rarely feel while reading the news these days. I began to fold the paper in half vertically, remembering how my Dad would always do the perfect “subway fold.” As I read the paper, I wondered to myself why I didn’t do this more often. It’s easy to just queue up a podcast or open the news on my phone. But there’s a certain beauty in the layout of print news, and there’s something distinct about being able to weigh the whole world in your hands.

After coming to a stalemate on the crossword, I made a second attempt at my homework. This time, the silence helped, and I was able to finish my work, only making a few tick marks here or there to measure my urge to check my phone. By this time, according to my borrowed alarm clock, it was 4:15pm. Having no idea what I should do with the rest of my day, I looked at Scully on my wall. I thought hard and realized that Scully barely did anything but shoot monsters and write up case reports. Sometimes she’d have a glass of red wine and watch Cable TV, but neither was available to me. I decided to do what I often do with my free time--to go to my rock climbing gym, which required nothing but climbing shoes and chalk. This was my favorite part of the day, because I was not even thinking about checking my phone. I finally started to feel like I was having a normal day, and that maybe I could do this kind of no-digital experiment more often. 

By the time I arrived back home, it was time for me to make dinner. The only issue I ran into here was that I didn’t have a timer. Once I finished, I took my food back to my room, then deflated when I remembered I couldn’t watch Netflix. Instead, I sat in my room alone, eating slower than I had in awhile. I was actually looking at the food I was eating, rather than shoveling it in my mouth while watching a movie. It was boring, but it made me step back and think about my eating habits. Next, I took a silent shower and got ready for bed. 

This was something I had been dreading all day, because my bedtime routine usually involves several episodes of a TV show and too many hours on the Internet. But that night, I crawled into bed with a book. I remembered when I was younger, I would read for hours in bed every night. I don’t really know when I stopped doing this, probably in high school when reading became more of a chore than a pleasure. But I tried to channel my childhood self, opening the fifth *Harry Potter*, chosen from the stack of favorite books I had brought with me to school. As is normal when I re-read any *Harry Potter* book, I was filled with nostalgic warmth that brought me right back to my days as a voracious reader. I began to wonder why I deny myself the simple pleasure of reading in bed. There was nothing stopping me from doing this every night. I like to think I’m not addicted to my phone, but in this moment I saw the reality of my situation. Not only am I overly dependent on my phone for waking up, getting myself dressed, getting the news, doing my homework, and even eating, but I use my phone instead of doing things that I actually love. After about an hour of reading, I set my book aside. I thought about whether I would do anything differently the next day.

In many ways, my phone is still a part of my routine. But after this experiment, I’ve started to recognize when I use my phone to make my life easier, versus when I use to as a way to fill the time. It’s easy to pull up a TV show on Netflix, but it’s more fulfilling to to do something you really love, like reading the paper, even if it takes more energy. I’m looking forward to filling my time with reading, doing crossword puzzles, and calling my friends, things that I sometimes forget about, but have never failed to make me happy.
