---
layout: post
title:  "WHAT TECHNOLOGY WILL LOOK LIKE IN THE FUTURE"
date:   2018-9-21
excerpt: "Technology and Jon Bois' <i>17776</i>"
image: "/images/probeselfie.jpg"
---

## WHAT TECHNOLOGY WILL LOOK LIKE IN THE FUTURE

Jon Bois’ multimedia, digital fiction project *17776*, also known as *What Football Will Like in the Future*, is a humorous and existential foray into an exciting new genre of online content. The piece covers a lot of thematic ground, jumping from sports to mortality and even what it means to be human. Bois’ use of video and text chat embraces and explores the full potential of Internet literature, imploring readers to consider ways in which technology can be used for storytelling. Technology itself is an omnipresent theme in *17776*, a story told mostly from the point of view of sentient space probes.

Despite this miracle of AI, technology in the future-Earth imagined by Bois is surprisingly stagnant. In Chapter 12: Intermission, part 2, the space probe known as Ten writes, “Almost everything you thought they would invent, they did. Flying cars, buildings that build themselves, jets that can take you from Arkansas to Paris in five minutes. You don’t see any of those things because people didn’t want them.” On our tech-driven Earth of 2018, it’s almost impossible to imagine that our progress in this field will ever waver. Our phones will have cameras clearer than the human eye, airplanes will get faster and smoother, and our minivans will be totally replaced with self-driving cars, which will of course give way to flying ones. But still, there are certain examples of people rejecting certain digital technology in favor of the familiar, warm analog.

David Sax wrote a whole book about this, called *Revenge of Analog*. He cites things like vinyl records and Polaroid cameras, analog devices that have garnered new, hipster appeal despite the ease and ready availability of their digital counterparts. But why have we began to flock back to the clunky, breakable, and expensive analog devices? Digital was born from these issues of analog, but has digital made our lives too easy? Ten writes: “If they advanced too much further technologically, those advances would inevitably intrude on their humanity.” Here, Jon Bois uncovers an essential aspect of humanity and life itself -- the need for struggle. Without a little discomfort we wouldn’t understand comfort, without chaos we wouldn’t know peace.This is the same need that explains why the humans of *17776* are so obsessed with long-distance football -- they need this struggle to add meaning to their otherwise purposeless, struggle-less, eternal lives. Maybe it’s only a little ironic that this narrative about the return to analog is rooted in a piece of multimedia Internet fiction.
