---
layout: post
title:  "BLACK MIRROR AND THE DIGITAL AFTERLIFE"
date:   2018-11-9
excerpt: ""
image: "/images/"
---

In “Be Right Back,” the first episode of *Black Mirror*’s second series, Martha is able to resurrect her late husband Ash using AI technology that synthesizes his digital footprint in order to imitate his voice, face, and personality. Throughout the episode, she struggles with her immeasurable grief and the AI’s inability to fully replicate her husband, highlighting the discrepancy between his digital self and his true self. In one of the show’s most poignant performances, Martha commands the AI to throw himself off a cliff, bitterly crying, “You're just a few ripples of you. There's no history to you. You're just a performance of stuff that he performed without thinking, and it's not enough.” In the end, Martha is unable to part with the AI, no doubt manipulated by the flawed, but vivid representation of her late husband. In true *Black Mirror* fashion, we are presented with a bleak projection of our possible future. This future is certainly realistic; it’s not hard to imagine AI manufactures honing in on desperate widows as a market for this kind of service, nor is it hard to imagine our increasingly abundant online data being extrapolated to represent our whole selves. But this is not *Black Mirror*’s only episode that gets to the heart of this nuanced idea of the digital afterlife. 
In “Black Museum,” episode six of series 4, Charlie Brooker imagines technology that allows the consciousness of a dying wife to inhabit her husband’s brain as a way to cheat death. When sharing a body with his wife becomes too much, the husband transfers her consciousness into a teddy bear, where the only two moods she is able to communicate are happy and sad. The ending here is also bleak -- stripped of her autonomy, her voice, and her mortality, she lives forever as a teddy bear in Rolo Hayne’s Black Museum for "authentic criminological artefacts,” (that is, until she is broken free by the episode’s protagonist). In this episode, as opposed to “Be Right Back,” it’s not the wife’s *data* that lives on, it is her actual consciousness. 
There is another episode that explores the digital afterlife. In “San Junipero,” episode 4 of series 3, technology allows the elderly to visit a simulated reality in which they can inhabit the bodies of their younger selves, and when they die, they have the option of uploading to this world completely. The episode follows the complicated love story of Yorkie and Kelly, who fall in love while visiting this world. At the end of the episode, Yorkie has decided to have her real body euthanized and to live forever in the simulated world of San Junipero. Kelly is apprehensive, wanting to fully die as did her husband and her daughter. But in the end, she decides to upload permanently to San Junipero, and the two ride off in a beautiful car to live their afterlives together. Unlike the previous two episodes that imagine a digital afterlife, “San Junipero” is not as overtly bleak, in fact it’s often praised as one of *Black Mirror*’s happiest endings. While it was satisfying to see the two end up together despite all their tribulations, and to see this powerful reversal of “Dead Lesbian Syndrome” in TV (https://www.vanityfair.com/hollywood/2016/11/tv-lgbtq-representation-glaad-report-dead-lesbian-syndrome), this conception of technology in this epsidoe still doesn’t sit well with me. 
“Be Right Back” and “Black Museum” are *supposed* to be morbid and uncomfortable, fables to warn *against* the digital afterlife. “San Junipero” feels more like a love story, with the afterlife technology serving more as a container for this narrative rather than the subject. But what if “San Junipero” is meant to express not the advantages to such technology, but rather to criticise our probable, welcoming acceptance of it? The final shot of the episode shows us the physical facilities that house the digital world of San Junipero and the consciousnesses of its inhabitants. This technology looms silently, eerily in the background of the whole narrative, just as it often does in our lives, and probably will in our future. Here is the discomfort of the digital afterlife in “San Junipero,” -- not in any tragic ending, but in our willingness to let this technology, albeit incrementally, but absolutely, fully, and inextricably into our lives, even into our deaths.
